Vanessa Sabino started her career as a system analyst in 2000, and in 2010 she jumped at the opportunity to start working with Digital Analytics, which brought together her educational background in Business, Applied Mathematics, and Computer Science. She gained experience from Internet companies in Brazil before moving to Canada, where she is now a data analysis lead for Shopify, transforming data into Marketing insights.

Follow Peadar’s series of interviews with data scientists here.

WHAT PROJECTS HAVE YOU WORKED ON THAT YOU WISH YOU COULD GO BACK TO AND DO BETTER?

Working as practitioner in a company, as opposed to consulting, means I always have the option of going back and improving past projects, as long as the time spent on this task can be justified. There are always new ideas to try and new libraries being published, so as a team lead I try to balance the time spent on higher priority tasks, which for my team currently is ETL work to improve our data warehouse, with exploratory analysis of our data sets and creating and improving models that add value to our business users.

WHAT ADVICE DO YOU HAVE TO YOUNGER ANALYTICS PROFESSIONALS AND IN PARTICULAR PHD STUDENTS IN THE SCIENCES?

My advice is to not underestimate the importance of communication skills, which goes from listening, in order to understand exactly what the data means and the context in which it is used, to presenting your results in a way that demonstrates impact and resonates with your audience.

WHAT DO YOU WISH YOU KNEW EARLIER ABOUT BEING A DATA SCIENTIST?

I wish I knew 20 years ago how to be a data scientist! When I was finishing high school and I had to decide what to do in university, I had some interest in Computer Science, but I had no idea what a career in that area would be like. The World Wide Web was just starting, and living in Brazil, I had the impression that all software developing companies were north of the Equator. So I decided to study Business, imagining I’d be able to spend my days using spreadsheets to optimize things. During the course I learned about data warehouses, business intelligence, statistics, data mining and decision science, but when it was over it was not clear how to get a job where I could apply this knowledge. I went to work on a IT consulting company, where I had the opportunity to improve my software developing skills, but I missed working with numbers, so after two years I left to start a new undergrad in Applied Mathematics, followed by a Masters in Computer Science. Then I continued working as a software developer, now in web companies, and that’s when I started learning about the vast amount of online behavior data they were collecting and the techniques being used to leverage its potential. “Data scientist” is a new name for something that covers many different traditional roles, and a better understanding of the related terms would have allowed me to make this career move sooner.

HOW DO YOU RESPOND WHEN YOU HEAR THE PHRASE ‘BIG DATA’?

I prefer to work closer to data analysis than to data engineering, so in an ideal world I’d have a small data set with a level of detail just right to summarize everything that I can extract from that data. Whatever size the data is, if someone is calling it big data it probably means that the tool they are using to manipulate it is no longer meeting certain expectations, and they are struggling with the technology in order to get their job done. I find it a little frustrating when you write correct code that should be able to transform a certain input to the desired output, but things don’t work as expected due to a lack of computing resources, which means you have to do extra work to get what you want. And the new solution only lasts until your data outgrows it again. But that’s just the way it is, and being in the boundary of what you can handle means you’ll be learning and growing in order to overcome the next challenges.

WHAT IS THE MOST EXCITING THING ABOUT YOUR FIELD?

I’m excited about the opportunities to collaborate in a wide range of projects. Nowadays everyone wants to improve things with data informed decisions, so you get to apply your skills to many areas and you learn a lot in the process.

HOW DO YOU GO ABOUT FRAMING A DATA PROBLEM – IN PARTICULAR, HOW DO YOU AVOID SPENDING TOO LONG, HOW DO YOU MANAGE EXPECTATIONS ETC. HOW DO YOU KNOW WHAT IS GOOD ENOUGH?

I always like to start with simple proof of concepts and iterate from there, using feedback from stakeholders to identify where are the biggest gains so that I can pivot the project in the right direction. But the most important thing in this process is to constantly ask “why”, in particular when dealing with requests. This helps you validate the understanding of the problem and enables you to offer better alternatives that the business user might not be aware of when they make a request.

WHAT PROJECTS HAVE YOU WORKED ON THAT YOU WISH YOU COULD GO BACK TO AND DO BETTER?

I agree that it is better to look forward rather than look backward. And my skills have frankly improved since I first started doing what we could call professional data analysis (which was probably just before starting my Masters a few years ago).

One project I did which springs to mind (and not naming names) is where there was a huge breakdown in communication and misaligned incentives. There needed to be more communication on that project and it overran the initial allotted time. I also spent not enough time communicating up front the risks and opportunities with the stakeholders.

The data was a lot messier than expected, and management had committed to delivered results in 2 weeks. This was impossible, the data cleaning and exploration phase took too long. Now I would focus on quicker wins. I also rushed to the ‘modelling’ phase without really understanding the data. I think such terms ‘understanding the data’ sound a bit academic to some stakeholders, but you need to clearly and articulately explain how important the data generation process is, and the uncertainty in that data.

Some of this comes from experience – now I focus on adding value as quickly as possible and keeping things simple. There I fell to the siren call of ‘do more analysis’ rather than thinking about how the analysis is conveyed.

WHAT ADVICE DO YOU HAVE TO YOUNGER ANALYTICS PROFESSIONALS AND IN PARTICULAR PHD STUDENTS IN THE SCIENCES?

I don’t have a PhD but I have recently been giving advice to people in that situation.

My advice is that having a portfolio of work if possible is great, or at least move towards doing an online course on Machine Learning or something cool like that.

The PyData videos are a good start too to watch. I’d recommend if you can to do any outreach or communication skills courses. There are many such courses at a lot of universities around the world, it’ll just help you understand the needs of others.

I think frankly that the most important skill for a Data Science is the ‘tactical application of empathy’ and that is something that working in a team really helps you develop. One thing I feel my Masters let me down on – as is common in Pure Mathematics – was a shortage of experience working in a team.

WHAT DO YOU WISH YOU KNEW EARLIER ABOUT BEING A DATA SCIENTIST?

The focus on communication skills, the need to add value every day. The fact that budget or a project can be terminated at any moment.

Adding value every day means showing results and sharing them, talking to people about stuff. Share visualizations, and share results – a lot of data science is about relationships and empathy. In fact I think that the tactical application of empathy is the greatest skill of our times.

'The tactical application of empathy is the greatest skill of our times' - @springcoil CLICK TO TWEET
You need to get out there and speak to the domain specialist, and understand what they understand. I believe that the best algorithms incorporate human as well as machine intelligence.

HOW DO YOU RESPOND WHEN YOU HEAR THE PHRASE ‘BIG DATA’?

I do like the distinction of small, medium and big data. I don’t worry so much about the terminology, and I focus on understanding exactly what my stakeholder wants from it.

I think, though, that it is often a distraction. I did one proof of concept as a consultant, that was an operational disaster. We didn’t have the resources to support a dev ops culture, nor did we have the capabilities to support a Hadoop cluster. Even worse the problem really could be solved more intelligently by being in RAM. But I got excited by the new tools, without understanding what they were really for.

I think this is a challenge, part of myself maturing as an engineer/data scientist is appreciating the limits of tools and avoiding the hype. Most companies don’t need a cluster, and the mean size of a cluster will remain one for a long time. Don’t believe the salesmen, and ask the experts in your community about what is needed.

In short: I feel it is strongly misleading but it is certainly here to stay.

HOW DID YOU END UP BEING A DATA ANALYST? WHAT IS THE MOST EXCITING THING ABOUT YOUR FIELD?

My academic and professional career have a bit of weird path. I started at Bristol in a Physics and Philosophy program. It was a really exciting time, and I learned a lot (some of it non-academic). I went into that program because I wanted to learn everything. At various points – especially in 2009-2010 the terminology of ‘data science’ began to pick up, and when I went into grad school in 2010, I was ‘aware’ of the discipline. I took a lot of financial maths classes at Luxembourg, just to keep that option open, yet I still in my heart wanted to be an academic.

I eventually realized (after some soul-searching) that academic opportunities were going to be too difficult to get, and that I could earn more in industry. So I did a few industrial internships including one at import.io, and towards the end of my Masters – I did a 6 month internship at a ‘small’ e-commerce company called Amazon.

I learned a lot at Amazon, and it was there that I realized i needed to work a lot harder on my software engineering skills. I’ve been working on them in my working life and through contributing to open source software and my various speaking engagements. I strongly recommend to any wanna data geeks to come to these and share your own knowledge :)

The most exciting thing about my field relates to the first statement about physics and philosophy – we truly are drowning in data, and we really with the computational resources we have now have the ability to answer or simulate certain questions in a business context. The web is a microscope, and your ERP system tells you more about your business than you can actually imagine – I’m very excited to help companies exploit their data.

HOW DO YOU GO ABOUT FRAMING A DATA PROBLEM – IN PARTICULAR, HOW DO YOU AVOID SPENDING TOO LONG, HOW DO YOU MANAGE EXPECTATIONS ETC. HOW DO YOU KNOW WHAT IS GOOD ENOUGH?

I like the OSEMIC framework (which I developed myself) and the CoNVO framework (which comes from Thinking with Data by Max Schron – I recommend the following video for an intro and the book itself.)

Let me explain – at the beginning of an ‘engagement’ I look for the Context, Need, Vision and Outcome of the project. Outcome means the delivery and asking these questions by having a conversation with stakeholders is a really good way to get to solving the ‘business problem’.

'I look for the Context, Need, Vision and Outcome of the project'' - @springcoil #datascience CLICK TO TWEET
A lot of this after a few years in the business still feels like an art rather than a science.

I like explaining to people the Data Science process – obtain data, scrub data, explore, model, interpret and communicate.

I think a lot of people get these kinds of notions and a lot of my conversations recently at work have been about data quality – and data quality really needs domain knowledge. It is amazing how easy it is to misinterpret a number – especially around things like unit conversion etc.

YOU SPENT SOMETIME AS A CONSULTANT IN DATA ANALYTICS. HOW DID YOU MANAGE CULTURAL CHALLENGES, DEALING WITH STAKEHOLDERS AND EXECUTIVES? WHAT ADVICE DO YOU HAVE FOR NEW STARTERS ABOUT THIS?

I would see a lot of the stuff above. One challenge is that some places aren’t ready for a data scientist nor do they know how to use one. I would avoid such places, and look for work elsewhere.

Some of this is a lack of vision, and one reason I do a lot of talks is to do ‘educated selling’ about the gospel of data-informed decision making and how the new tools such as the PyData stack and R are helping us extract more and more value out of data.

I’ve also found that visualizations help a lot, humans react to stories and pictures more than to numbers.

My advice to new-starters is over communicate, and learn some soft skills. The frameworks I mentioned help a bit in structuring and explaining a project to stakeholders. I recommend also reading this interview series, I learned a lot from it too. :)

David Hand is Senior Research Investigator and Emeritus Professor of Mathematics at Imperial College, London, and Chief Scientific Advisor to Winton Capital Management. He is a Fellow of the British Academy, and a recipient of the Guy Medal of the Royal Statistical Society. He has served (twice) as President of the Royal Statistical Society, and is on the Board of the UK Statistics Authority. He has published 300 scientific papers and 26 books. He has broad research interests in areas including classification, data mining, anomaly detection, and the foundations of statistics. His applications interests include psychology, physics, and the retail credit industry – he and his research group won the 2012 Credit Collections and Risk Award for Contributions to the Credit Industry. He was made OBE for services to research and innovation in 2013.


WHAT PROJECTS HAVE YOU WORKED ON THAT YOU WISH YOU COULD GO BACK TO AND DO BETTER?

I think I always have this feeling about most of the things I have worked on – that, had I been able to spend more time on it, I could have done better. Unfortunately, there are so many things crying out for one’s attention that one has to do the best one can in the time available. Quality of projects probably also has a diminishing returns aspect – spend another day/week/year on a project and you reduce the gap between its current quality and perfection by a half. Which means you never achieve perfection.

WHAT ADVICE DO YOU HAVE TO YOUNGER ANALYTICS PROFESSIONALS AND IN PARTICULAR PHD STUDENTS IN THE SCIENCES?

I generally advise PhD students to find a project which interests them, which is solvable or on which significant headway can be made in the time they have available, and which other people (but not too many) care about. That last point means that others will be interested in the results you get, while the qualification means that there are not also thousands of others working on the problem (because that would mean you would probably be pipped to the post).

WHAT DO YOU WISH YOU KNEW EARLIER ABOUT BEING A STATISTICIAN? WHAT DO YOU THINK INDUSTRIAL DATA SCIENTISTS HAVE TO LEARN FROM THIS?

I think it is important that people recognise that statistics is not a branch of mathematics. Certainly statistics is a mathematical discipline, but so are engineering, physics, and surveying, and we don’t regard them as parts of mathematics. To be a competent professional statistician one needs to understand the mathematics underlying the tools, but one also needs to understand something about the area in which one is applying those tools. And then there are other aspects: it may be necessary, for example, to use a suboptimal method if this means that others can understand and buy in to what you have done. Industrial data scientists need to recognise the fundamental aim of a data scientist is to solve a problem, and to do this one should adopt the best approach for the job, be it a significance test, a likelihood function, or a Bayesian analysis. Data scientists must be pragmatic, not dogmatic. But I’m sure that most practicing data scientists do recognise this.

The fundamental aim of a data scientist is to solve a problem. #datascience CLICK TO TWEET
HOW DO YOU RESPOND WHEN YOU HEAR THE PHRASE ‘BIG DATA’?

Probably a resigned sigh. ‘Big data’ is proclaimed as the answer to humanity’s problems. However, while it’s true that large data sets, a consequence of modern data capture technologies, do hold great promise for interesting and valuable advances, we should not fail to recognise that they also come with considerable technical challenges. The easiest of these lie in the data manipulation aspects of data science (the searching, sorting, and matching of large sets) while the toughest lie in the essentially statistical inferential aspects. The notion that one nowadays has ‘all’ of the data for any particular context is seldom true or relevant. And big data come with the data quality challenges of small data along with new challenges of its own.

WHAT IS THE MOST EXCITING THING ABOUT YOUR FIELD?

Where to begin! The eminent statistician John Tukey once said ‘the great thing about statistics is that you get to play in everyone’s back yard’, meaning that statisticians can work in medicine, physics, government, economics, finance, education, and so on. The point is that data are evidence, and to extract meaning, information, and knowledge from data you need statistics. The world truly is the statistician’s oyster.

DO YOU FEEL UNIVERSITIES WILL HAVE TO ADAPT TO ‘DATA SCIENCE’? WHAT DO YOU THINK WILL HAVE TO BE DONE IN SAY MATHEMATICAL EDUCATION TO KEEP UP WITH THESE TRENDS?

Yes, and you can see that this is happening, with many universities establishing data science courses. Data science is mostly statistics, but with a leavening of relevant parts of computer science – some knowledge of databases, search algorithms, matching methods, parallel processing, and so on.